README.md, before:

![Kalamar](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/KorAP/Kalamar/master/dev/demo/img/kalamar.png)

Kalamar is a [Mojolicious](http://mojolicio.us/)-based user interface
frontend for the [KorAP Corpus Analysis Platform](http://korap.ids-mannheim.de/).

![Kalamar Screenshots](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/KorAP/Kalamar/master/dev/demo/img/screenshots.png)

## INSTALLATION

### Setup

To fetch the latest version of Kalamar ...

```
$ git clone https://github.com/KorAP/Kalamar
```

### Generate Static Asset Files

To generate the static asset files (scripts, styles, images ...),
you need NodeJS >= 6.0.0.
For processing Sass, you will need Ruby with
the ```sass``` gem in addition.
This will probably need administration
rights, depending on your installation path.
These tools may also be available with a package manager.

You can check, if all tools are available using

```
$ npm -v
$ sass -v
```

Afterwards you can install grunt and run grunt to create the assets.

```
$ cd Kalamar
$ npm install -g grunt-cli
$ npm install
$ grunt
```

Whenever the assets change, just rerun ```grunt```.

### Start Server

Kalamar uses the [Mojolicious](http://mojolicio.us/) framework,
that expects a Perl version of at least 5.10.1.
The recommended environment is based on [Perlbrew](http://perlbrew.pl/)
with [App::cpanminus](http://search.cpan.org/~miyagawa/App-cpanminus/).

Some perl modules are not on CPAN yet, so you need to install them from GitHub.
The easiest way to do this is using
[App::cpanminus](http://search.cpan.org/~miyagawa/App-cpanminus/).
This will probably need administration rights.

```
$ cpanm git://github.com/Akron/Mojolicious-Plugin-Localize.git
$ cpanm git://github.com/Akron/Mojolicious-Plugin-TagHelpers-ContentBlock.git
```

Then install the dependencies using
[App::cpanminus](http://search.cpan.org/~miyagawa/App-cpanminus/)
(there is no need to install Kalamar)
and run the test suite.

```
$ cd Kalamar
$ cpanm --installdeps .
$ perl Makefile.PL
$ make test
```

Kalamar can be deployed like all
[Mojolicious apps](http://mojolicio.us/perldoc/Mojolicious/Guides/Cookbook#DEPLOYMENT).
The easiest way is to start the built-in server:

```
$ perl script/kalamar daemon
```

Kalamar will then be available at ```localhost:3000``` in your browser.

By default, Kalamar tries to connect to ```http://localhost:9999/api/```,
followed by the most current version of the API.
You may change that endpoint to the KorAP API provider in the configuration
(see [Kustvakt](https://github.com/KorAP/Kustvakt) for further information)
or by using the environment variable ```KALAMAR_API```.


## Configuration

The basic configuration file is ```kalamar.conf```. To define derivations,
create a configuration file with the pattern ```kalamar.myconf.conf``` and
follow the descriptions in ```kalamar.conf```.

To start Kalamar with a derivative configuration, set the ```MOJO_MODE```
environment variable.

```
$ MOJO_MODE=myconf perl script/kalamar daemon
```

For client-side configurations, a file ```kalamar.conf.js``` can be
introduced, that will be consulted during the build process, loading
optional components using a ```require(...)``` directive (see example below).


### Localization

To create a localized version of Kalamar, start the ```localize``` command
with the target locale as its argument, e.g. ```pl``` for polish.

```
$ perl script/kalamar localize pl
```

The newly defined dictionary file can then be modified and added to the resources
definition of the ```Localize``` plugin in the configuration:

```perl
Localize => {
  resources => ['kalamar.pl.dict']
}
```

To localize example queries according to a special corpus environment,
define a name of the example corpus in the configuration.

```perl
Kalamar => {
  examplecorpus => 'mycorpus'
}

```

Then create a translation file based on ```kalamar.queries.dict```
as a blueprint and add it to the ```Localize``` resource list.

Templates can be localized and customized by overriding
the ```Template``` dictionary entries.

Currently the JavaScript translations are separated and stored in ```dev/js/src/loc```.
To generate assets relying on different locales, add the locale to ```Gruntfile.js```.

To localize the annotation helper according to a special corpus environment,
different annotation foundries can be loaded in ```kalamar.conf.js```.
For example to support ```marmot``` and ```malt```,
the configuration may look like this:

```js
require([
  "hint/foundries/marmot",
  "hint/foundries/malt"
]);
```

See ```dev/js/src/hint/foundries``` for
more optional foundries.


### Customization

The landing page can be customized by overriding the
entry for ```Template_intro``` in the dictionary.

Some sections of the user interface can be customized
by adding new
[content blocks](https://github.com/Akron/Mojolicious-Plugin-TagHelpers-ContentBlock).
Currently the documented sections are in
```footer```, in the bottom line of the user interface,
```sidebar```, in the left part of the user interface if present,
```headerButtonGroup```, in the right top part of the user interface,
and ```loginInfo```, below the login form if present.


### Plugins

Some plugins are bundled as part of Kalamar. Plugins can be loaded
via configuration file in an array

```perl
{
  Kalamar => {
    plugins => ['Auth']
  }
}
```

Currently bundled plugins are
- ```Auth```: For integrating user management
  supported by [Kustvakt full](https://github.com/KorAP/Kustvakt/tree/master/full).
- ```Piwik```: For integrating Matomo/Piwik


## COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

### Bundled Software

[ALERTIFY.js](https://fabien-d.github.io/alertify.js/)
is released under the terms of the MIT License.
[Almond](https://github.com/jrburke/almond)
is released under the terms of the BSD License.
[dagre](https://highlightjs.org/)
is released under the terms of the MIT License.
[Highlight.js](https://highlightjs.org/)
is released under the terms of the BSD License.
[Jasmine](https://jasmine.github.io/)
is released under the terms of the MIT License.
[RequireJS](http://requirejs.org/)
is released under the terms of the BSD License.
[Font Awesome](http://fontawesome.io)
by Dave Gandy
is released under the terms of the
[SIL OFL 1.1](http://scripts.sil.org/OFL).
[Benchmark.js](https://benchmarkjs.com/)
is released under the terms of the MIT License.
[lodash](https://lodash.com/)
is released under the terms of the MIT License.
[Platform.js](https://mths.be/platform/)
is released under the terms of the MIT License.
[INTRO.JS](https://github.com/usablica/intro.js)
is released under the terms of the GNU AFFERO GENERAL
PUBLIC LICENSE (GNU AGPLv3).

### Original Software

Copyright (C) 2015-2019, [IDS Mannheim](http://www.ids-mannheim.de/)<br>
Author: [Nils Diewald](http://nils-diewald.de/), Helge Stallkamp
Contributor: Eliza Margaretha (Documentation), Susanne Feix (Translation)

Kalamar is developed as part of the [KorAP](http://korap.ids-mannheim.de/)
Corpus Analysis Platform at the
[Leibniz Institute for the German Language (IDS)](http://ids-mannheim.de/),
member of the
[Leibniz Association](https://www.leibniz-gemeinschaft.de/en/home/)
and supported by the [KobRA](http://www.kobra.tu-dortmund.de) project,
funded by the
[Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF)](http://www.bmbf.de/en/).

Kalamar is free software published under the
[BSD-2 License](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/KorAP/Kalamar/master/LICENSE).

Commit message:

Add information on secret file to readme
Change-Id: I22148257c9307cb5474d798d2f826f7f2752cc5a

README.md, after:

![Kalamar](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/KorAP/Kalamar/master/dev/demo/img/kalamar.png)

Kalamar is a [Mojolicious](http://mojolicio.us/)-based user interface
frontend for the [KorAP Corpus Analysis Platform](http://korap.ids-mannheim.de/).

![Kalamar Screenshots](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/KorAP/Kalamar/master/dev/demo/img/screenshots.png)

## INSTALLATION

### Setup

To fetch the latest version of Kalamar ...

```
$ git clone https://github.com/KorAP/Kalamar
```

### Generate Static Asset Files

To generate the static asset files (scripts, styles, images ...),
you need NodeJS >= 6.0.0.
For processing Sass, you will need Ruby with
the ```sass``` gem in addition.
This will probably need administration
rights, depending on your installation path.
These tools may also be available with a package manager.

You can check, if all tools are available using

```
$ npm -v
$ sass -v
```

Afterwards you can install grunt and run grunt to create the assets.

```
$ cd Kalamar
$ npm install -g grunt-cli
$ npm install
$ grunt
```

Whenever the assets change, just rerun ```grunt```.

### Start Server

Kalamar uses the [Mojolicious](http://mojolicio.us/) framework,
that expects a Perl version of at least 5.10.1.
The recommended environment is based on [Perlbrew](http://perlbrew.pl/)
with [App::cpanminus](http://search.cpan.org/~miyagawa/App-cpanminus/).

Some perl modules are not on CPAN yet, so you need to install them from GitHub.
The easiest way to do this is using
[App::cpanminus](http://search.cpan.org/~miyagawa/App-cpanminus/).
This will probably need administration rights.

```
$ cpanm git://github.com/Akron/Mojolicious-Plugin-Localize.git
$ cpanm git://github.com/Akron/Mojolicious-Plugin-TagHelpers-ContentBlock.git
```

Then install the dependencies using
[App::cpanminus](http://search.cpan.org/~miyagawa/App-cpanminus/)
(there is no need to install Kalamar)
and run the test suite.

```
$ cd Kalamar
$ cpanm --installdeps .
$ perl Makefile.PL
$ make test
```

Kalamar can be deployed like all
[Mojolicious apps](http://mojolicio.us/perldoc/Mojolicious/Guides/Cookbook#DEPLOYMENT).
The easiest way is to start the built-in server:

```
$ perl script/kalamar daemon
```

Kalamar will then be available at ```localhost:3000``` in your browser.

By default, Kalamar tries to connect to ```http://localhost:9999/api/```,
followed by the most current version of the API.
You may change that endpoint to the KorAP API provider in the configuration
(see [Kustvakt](https://github.com/KorAP/Kustvakt) for further information)
or by using the environment variable ```KALAMAR_API```.


## Configuration

The basic configuration file is ```kalamar.conf```. To define derivations,
create a configuration file with the pattern ```kalamar.myconf.conf``` and
follow the descriptions in ```kalamar.conf```.

To start Kalamar with a derivative configuration, set the ```MOJO_MODE```
environment variable.

```
$ MOJO_MODE=myconf perl script/kalamar daemon
```

For client-side configurations, a file ```kalamar.conf.js``` can be
introduced, that will be consulted during the build process, loading
optional components using a ```require(...)``` directive (see example below).

### Secret file

Kalamar uses (rotating secrets)[https://mojolicious.org/perldoc/Mojolicious#secrets]
to sign cookies. Put a file called `kalamar.secret` in the root of the application
with one secret per line.

### Localization

To create a localized version of Kalamar, start the ```localize``` command
with the target locale as its argument, e.g. ```pl``` for polish.

```
$ perl script/kalamar localize pl
```

The newly defined dictionary file can then be modified and added to the resources
definition of the ```Localize``` plugin in the configuration:

```perl
Localize => {
  resources => ['kalamar.pl.dict']
}
```

To localize example queries according to a special corpus environment,
define a name of the example corpus in the configuration.

```perl
Kalamar => {
  examplecorpus => 'mycorpus'
}

```

Then create a translation file based on ```kalamar.queries.dict```
as a blueprint and add it to the ```Localize``` resource list.

Templates can be localized and customized by overriding
the ```Template``` dictionary entries.

Currently the JavaScript translations are separated and stored in ```dev/js/src/loc```.
To generate assets relying on different locales, add the locale to ```Gruntfile.js```.

To localize the annotation helper according to a special corpus environment,
different annotation foundries can be loaded in ```kalamar.conf.js```.
For example to support ```marmot``` and ```malt```,
the configuration may look like this:

```js
require([
  "hint/foundries/marmot",
  "hint/foundries/malt"
]);
```

See ```dev/js/src/hint/foundries``` for
more optional foundries.


### Customization

The landing page can be customized by overriding the
entry for ```Template_intro``` in the dictionary.

Some sections of the user interface can be customized
by adding new
[content blocks](https://github.com/Akron/Mojolicious-Plugin-TagHelpers-ContentBlock).
Currently the documented sections are in
```footer```, in the bottom line of the user interface,
```sidebar```, in the left part of the user interface if present,
```headerButtonGroup```, in the right top part of the user interface,
and ```loginInfo```, below the login form if present.


### Plugins

Some plugins are bundled as part of Kalamar. Plugins can be loaded
via configuration file in an array

```perl
{
  Kalamar => {
    plugins => ['Auth']
  }
}
```

Currently bundled plugins are
- ```Auth```: For integrating user management
  supported by [Kustvakt full](https://github.com/KorAP/Kustvakt/tree/master/full).
- ```Piwik```: For integrating Matomo/Piwik


## COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

### Bundled Software

[ALERTIFY.js](https://fabien-d.github.io/alertify.js/)
is released under the terms of the MIT License.
[Almond](https://github.com/jrburke/almond)
is released under the terms of the BSD License.
[dagre](https://highlightjs.org/)
is released under the terms of the MIT License.
[Highlight.js](https://highlightjs.org/)
is released under the terms of the BSD License.
[Jasmine](https://jasmine.github.io/)
is released under the terms of the MIT License.
[RequireJS](http://requirejs.org/)
is released under the terms of the BSD License.
[Font Awesome](http://fontawesome.io)
by Dave Gandy
is released under the terms of the
[SIL OFL 1.1](http://scripts.sil.org/OFL).
[Benchmark.js](https://benchmarkjs.com/)
is released under the terms of the MIT License.
[lodash](https://lodash.com/)
is released under the terms of the MIT License.
[Platform.js](https://mths.be/platform/)
is released under the terms of the MIT License.
[INTRO.JS](https://github.com/usablica/intro.js)
is released under the terms of the GNU AFFERO GENERAL
PUBLIC LICENSE (GNU AGPLv3).

### Original Software

Copyright (C) 2015-2019, [IDS Mannheim](http://www.ids-mannheim.de/)<br>
Author: [Nils Diewald](http://nils-diewald.de/), Helge Stallkamp
Contributor: Eliza Margaretha (Documentation), Susanne Feix (Translation)

Kalamar is developed as part of the [KorAP](http://korap.ids-mannheim.de/)
Corpus Analysis Platform at the
[Leibniz Institute for the German Language (IDS)](http://ids-mannheim.de/),
member of the
[Leibniz Association](https://www.leibniz-gemeinschaft.de/en/home/)
and supported by the [KobRA](http://www.kobra.tu-dortmund.de) project,
funded by the
[Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF)](http://www.bmbf.de/en/).

Kalamar is free software published under the
[BSD-2 License](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/KorAP/Kalamar/master/LICENSE).
